Methods For Encrypting Application Data
There are multiple strategies for ensuring that data processed and generated by an application ends up in an encrypted state on disk.

Applications and underlying infrastructure services will leverage the following concepts:

Key Management Service and Encryption Keys
Refer to a key management service to determine which encryption key will be used to encrypt the data.

AWS provides a key management service called KMS which is tightly integrated with the AWS services and the AWS SDKs that a developer would be using.

Client-Side Encryption
You can choose to encrypt the data within the application prior to persisting or writing. We will loosely refer to this as client-side encryption.

Server-Side or AWS Service native encryption
Alternatively, have the AWS service handle the underlying encryption activities. We can refer to this broadly as server-side encryption.


scenario1
----------
Writing Data to Disk With Client-Side Encryption

An application may write data to a disk mount such as an EBS volume or EFS mount. The application can use AWS SDKs and the KMS service to encrypt a file prior to writing to disk.

Once a data encryption key is obtained, Developers can choose to use language native encryption libraries. They can also leverage the AWS SDK to go through the encryption process. The AWS SDK helps by encapsulating many of the steps required to encrypt and store the data.

scenario2
---------

Using Encrypted Disk Volumes in AWS
On the infrastructure side we need to ensure that disk volumes are configured to use KMS encryption so that the entire disk remains encrypted regardless of the fact that the application chooses to encrypt or not.

The EC2 Service can obtain a data encryption key from KMS. The encryption key is based on a master key that the EBS volume is associated with.

The data encryption key is then used by the hypervisor to ensure that all I/O operations result in encrypted data on disk. Write operations will use the key to encrypt and read operations will use the key to decrypt.

The hypervisor will make the data available and decrypted to the instance operating system.


scenario3
---------

Writing Data to a Database Table
The same concept we looked at for encrypting file data on disk volumes applies to databases too. The application should encrypt sensitive data prior to storing the record value in the database, using the encryption SDKs. On the platform service or server-side, we need to ensure that encryption is enabled when provisioning the database platform of choice (e.g. RDS, DynamoDB etc).

scenario4
---------

Writing Data to Object Storage, such as S3
Highly sensitive data should be encrypted by the application prior to putting an object in S3. In this case, because we use client-side encryption from within the application code and encryption SDK, S3 will not be aware about the encryption.

In the case of S3, the application code can also set parameters for server-side encryption so that the S3 service will handle the encryption for the particular objects. S3 buckets can also be configured to have default server-side encryption enabled for all new objects. In this case encryption is transparent to the application code.

As a best practice we want to ensure that S3 server-side encryption is enabled by default where possible.

---------------------------
+Client-Side vs.Server-Side+
----------------------------

Client-Side Encryption
Pros
The cloud provider, that is AWS, or anyone with access to the underlying disk volumes will only see ciphered or encrypted data. The data is effectively useless to them unless of course they have permissions or access to the encryption keys.

Cons
The code will have additional complexity of using SDK's and libraries required to perform cryptographic functions. Some additional understanding of encryption is also needed to do this effectively. There is always the potential of this additional functionality being inadvertently omitted from the code .

Server-Side Encryption
Pros
For most use cases server-side encryption can be completely transparent to the developer or application code. So, from an implementation perspective, it is simpler and easier to use.

Cons
Anyone with read access permissions to the service in question will perform a read and be able to see the plain text data.

Best Practices
As a best practice it is highly advisable to leverage server-side encryption as a default deployment pattern for any AWS services being used to store data.

The decision to use client-side encryption in your applications may be made on a case-by-case basis for sensitive data or to meet any compliance requirements.
